we begin in Gaza where Palestinians
waiting for Aid have again come under
Israeli fire as Supply convoys
[Applause]
arrived several Palestinians have been
injured by Israeli forces whilst waiting
for much needed supplies at the alati
roundabout in Gaza City only a few
people were able to get some boxes that
included water flour and other items the
trucks left carrying some of those
injured by the Israeli gunfire
let's bring in now Omar Shakir he's the
Israel and Palestine director at Human
Rights Watch and joins us live from
Chicago so here we have Israeli forces
again firing on people waiting for Aid
the second such attack since yesterday
and after more than a hundred people of
course were killed in a similar
situation last week this seems to now be
happening with some alarming regularity
what do you make of
it look I mean let's start with the
clear clear responsibility here of the
Israeli government they are starving the
Palestinians of Gaza they are using
starvation of civilians as a weapon of
War which is a war crime as the
occupying power the Israeli government
has the duty not only to ensure the
humanitarian needs of the occupied
population are met but they have to
provide for the welfare of that
population and they have to restore
public order and safety they're failing
to do so they're creating the
catastrophic
conditions that are leading to these
sorts of situations and moreover the
Israeli government has a long track
record of using unlawful excessive force
against Palestinians not only in the
context of air strikes but also in
normal policing situations whether it
was the protests during the march of
return in 2018 or 19 or the routine
killings of Palestinians in the West
Bank there is a decades long pattern of
these abuses taking place with
impunity this does seem to be
particularly poignant though given that
they're bringing in a very tiny amount
of Aid and then firing on people who are
so desperately trying to get hold of
it absolutely I mean people are in Gaza
facing incessant bombardment they are
being starved they lack access to basic
resources they have been displaced
multiple times over most of their MO for
most of them their homes um their
hospitals their Community institutions
their schools have been damaged or
destroyed and they're left every day
just trying to survive and the idea that
people are being killed as they scaven
for meager rations of food is just
appalling and is a reminder why there
must be International immediate action
to prevent further Mass atrocities this
is a sign of just how desperate and
catastrophic can conditions are six
months into this nightmare which began
of course not in a vacuum but in a
reality of years of closure of unlawful
uh killings of Abus of occupation of
apartheid and persecution denial of rer
return there's a larger context but
we've seen an unprecedented scale of
killings and repression I we've got the
the US vice president Kam Harris calling
for more Aid into Gaza somewhat
belatedly also calling for a ceasefire
us has also been involved in an aid drop
what sort of message does this send when
we know that the US is Israel's number
one backer and without the weapons that
it provides Israel wouldn't be able to
carry on this
war look I mean people have been warning
about this very scenario for days weeks
and months and the United States has
failed to use its leverage to put action
behind its words and those words have
been Meek words but any sort of action
in order to prevent this sort of
situation the United States
unquestionably has the leverage but the
United States has simply been unwilling
to um stop providing arms to the Israeli
government to be much more strong in
their condemnation to support action
around accountability and and to
complicity and to actually put teeth
behind and pushing the Israeli
government it is an embarrassment to you
the US's role in the world that it is
doing this Aid drop look I mean for some
families this Aid could provide critical
Aid we shouldn't in a situation of
starvation look past that but at the
same time the United States can and
should be doing so much more um and it's
failed to do so but lives still hang in
the balance and we and there's still
time to act uh people are not bargaining
chips humanitarian Aid should not be um
something that can be Bartered and
bargained away they should be provided
immediately just as hostage civilian
self hostage should be immediately and
unconditionally released the un's top
Court the the international court of
justice has ordered that uh Israel does
not commit acts that could be called
genocidal Israel had to produce a report
uh a week or so ago to say how it was
meeting that commitment what's your view
on
it well it's not complying that is
Crystal Clear uh the Israeli government
was ordered to ensure basic services and
humanitarian Aid this was a binding
order from the world's court and they
failed to do so the amount of uh I mean
they did not turn on the tap of water um
you know we have destruction of water
infrastructure they did not turn flip
the switch on electricity and not only
that but the amount of trucks entering
Gaza shockingly even decreased as
compared in the weeks before uh you have
a reality in which you went from about
147 trucks a day to under 100 to even
around 50 in the middle and end of
February in addition almost no trucks
are going Beyond Rafa and Southern Gaza
so Northern Gaza remains facing the most
catastrophic scenario as we've discussed
Aid convoys have been struck
humanitarian organizations have stopped
being able to provide many of them
services in Northern Gaza uh in addition
we've seen continued attacks on
hospitals scores of Palestinian bodies
piling up by the day the Israeli
government is not complying with this
order and states must use all forms of
lever
including sanctions and embargos to
press the Israeli government to comply
this is a test of the rules-based
international order and the world is
failing and we've got the head of HRA
Filipe lazarini saying that Israel is
trying to eliminate that Aid
organization just give us an idea of how
essential unro is to the Palestinian
people and how perilous is its
survival H is indispensable it is the
largest uh provider of humanitarian
Services humanitarian organizations that
operate in Gaza have said we cannot
replace unoa Ena is unique in its
ability to provide services again um in
a situation in which there's a looming
famine people are starving uh it is
appalling that states have cut funding
to anura these are serious obviously
allegations that anura is facing um but
Human Rights Watch has reviewed the
evidence there is uh you know no uh
evidence actually to back up these
claims but that's not really the issue
here the issue here is that you know
this is an agency providing services to
Palestinians who have nothing to do uh
with those implicated Aid must be
restored um and part of what the Israeli
government has done to not comply with
the icj order has been its efforts to
dismantle unoa which is part of a
yearslong effort to liquidate the
Palestinian refugee cause it cannot be
liquidated these are basic rights to
return turn under international law and
it's critical that Ono be allowed to to
fulfill its essential Duty now it's more
important maybe than ever Omar Shakir
with Human Rights Watch thanks very much
taking the time to talk to us on Al
jazer thank you